# Interrupts

This article covers notes on **interrupts** — events that break the normal
pipeline of instructions fed to the CPU.

Say we're on our laptop and want to read a news article on some webpage.
The webpage suddenly displays a popup, telling us to disable AdBlock.
Annoyed, we click the back button. To do so, we might shift our mouse (or
touch our trackpad), to move the cursor. How does the computer know to move
the cursor to that position?

The answer is, it doesn't. At least, not on its own. Instead, when we move
the cursor with some peripheral (e.g., a mouse, trackpad, or keyboad), the
peripheral's controller or adapter sends a sequence of _interrupts_ to the
CPU.

We barely notice these interruptions because of how fast the CPU is. Human
reaction time is measured in milliseconds — the fastest possible conscious
reaction times range from 150 to 300 milliseconds. The CPU, however,
operates at the GHz level — we're talking _nanoseconds_. In 1 millisecond,
a tiny fraction of even the fastest reaction times, the CPU has already
gone through a million instructions, if not more.

This is even more remarkable when we realize just how much we expect the
computer to do: We type an email on a browser window while listening to
music on some app or viewing a PDF with some reader. This is all part of
the computer's _exception control flow_.

## Mechanisms

Importantly, interrupts aren't some low-level concept. They exist at every
level of the computer system. At the lowest level are **exceptions**. These
are direct changes to the system's control flow. For example, when our
laptop runs out battery. Some of us may have noticed that when a computer
screen dies and we quickly plug in the power source immediately after, we
find that the computer hasn't died entirely. We're back where we left off
(but it may take the computer some time to get back up to speed). This is
possible because of some exception mechanism.

At the higher levels, we have **context switches**. Operating system
exceptions that allow us to go from apps like Word to Chrome to some notes
app very quickly. **Signals** are exception mechanisms that we, as
programmers, can use to interrupt the system.
