# Memory Hierarchy

Thinking about how the assembler might translate these symbols into memory
addresses, we notice an additional factor we have to consider when
designing the computer system's instruction set &mdash; _addressing_. If
the computer system has a large amount of memory, then our computer must
work with long memory addresses. And the longer a memory address is, the
longer it takes for the CPU to perform its operations, since it can only
execute its instructions once it's received all of the addresses bits. This
time delay is further increased by the fact that the CPU also has to access
the long address.

Fortunately, von Neumann provided a solution to this problem: Instead of
implementing main memory as just one giant block, we implement it as a
__memory hierarchy__:

![Memory hierarchy](https://res.cloudinary.com/sublimis/image/upload/v1653173749/cs/memory_hierarchy_dxnguc.svg)

Memory hierarchy is system for organizing memory. The idea is that we take
all of the computer's registers, and divvy them up into four places. A
small amount of registers are given to the CPU. These registers are called
the __processor registers__. A slightly larger amount of registers are
placed immediately next to the CPU. These registers are called __caches__.
A large amount of registers are placed in _main memory_, close to the cache
but further from the CPU. The largest amount of registers are found in the
_disk_ (i.e., secondary memory); close to main memory but the furthest from
the CPU.

When arranged in this sequential manner, we see that the closer we are to
the CPU, the shorter the address. Thus, the processor registers are the
fastest registers to read and write, followed by the cache and main memory.
The disk's registers are the furthest from the CPU, and take the longest to
read and write.

## Processor Registers

Given how fast processor registers are, they're used for a few key
operations. Some of the registers are __data registers__. These registers
are used to store the necessary data for completing an operation's
execution. For example, if the CPU must execute `ADD x y`, the data
contents of `x` and `y` are stored inside the data registers to perform the
computation.

Some of the registers are __address registers__. These registers are used
to store some address outside the CPU, perhaps in main memory. For example,
suppose the instruction `DEF x y` means "assign the value in `y` to the
address `x`." To execute this instruction, the CPU might store the value
stored in `y` in some data register, then store the address correspoding to
`y` inside an address register.

## Addressing Modes

Using memory hierarchy, we have different ways to read and write registers,
called __addressing modes__. These modes are triggered by the way the
assembly language instructions are written.

__Immediate addressing__ is the fastest addressing mode. We're explicitly
providing data to the CPU:

```nasm
ADD 1 2
```

__Register addressing__ is the next fastest addressing mode. If the data's
already stored inside the CPU's data registers, we can simply provide the
Assembly language's instruction representing the registers:

```nasm
ADD R1 R2
```

__Direct addressing__ is the next fastest. Here, we're explicitly
specifying the address:

```nasm
ADD R1 M[321]
```

Finally, the slowest form of addressing is indirect addressing. Here, we're
using symbols to denote addresses, so the CPU must wait to receive the
addresses:

```nasm
ADD x y
```
